CMOS-23: Add CMOS configuration docs (#139)
couchbaselabs/observability: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/configure-cmos.adoc

# Prometheus url sub path
PROMETHEUS_URL_SUBPATH=${PROMETHEUS_URL_SUBPATH-/prometheus/}

# Prometheus storage path
PROMETHEUS_STORAGE_PATH=${PROMETHEUS_STORAGE_PATH-/prometheus}

# Microlith configuration
PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR=${PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR:-/etc/prometheus/couchbase/monitoring/}
----

=== Endpoints

In CMOS, a https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#file_sd_config[file-based service discovery^] approach is used to support adding/removing endpoints.
These endpoints are used to dynamically scrape metrics.

Based on which services are enabled, the microlith will construct a set of dynamic endpoints.
These endpoints are created for each service by adding a JSON file to the `${PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR:-/etc/prometheus/couchbase/monitoring/}`.

To add Couchbase Server endpoints, create a similar JSON format file like the example in the `/etc/prometheus/couchbase/custom/` directory mounted on the container.
In order to always stay current with the system state, this file is periodically rescanned to add or remove targets.

> Whereas, this enables addition of a new scrape target, it does not automatically add dashboards to Grafana for this scrape target and you will have to do that manually.

Reviewer: Wasn't clear on the meaning here, so correct me if my interpretation is wrong, but maybe something like:

```suggestion
While this enables the addition of a new scrape target, it will not automatically add dashboards to Grafana. The dashboards will need to be added manually for the relevant scrape target.
```

[console]
----
[
    {
      "targets": [
        "exporter:9091"
      ],
      "labels": {
        "job": "db1",
        "container": "exporter"
      }
    }
]
----

You can set the authentication credentials for your Couchbase Server clusters using the `$CB_SERVER_AUTH_USER` and `$CB_SERVER_AUTH_PASSWORD` environment variables.
Note that currently we do not support using different credentials for multiple clusters.

[NOTE]
This is a legacy way of configuring Prometheus targets and we recommend not to use this approach.

> You can use CMOS UI to perform the same using the Add Cluster option present on the landing page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use CMOS UI to perform the same using the "Add Cluster" option present on the landing page.
```

.Add cluster image
image::add-cluster-vm.png[]

== Loki

Configuration file for the log aggregation system Loki is present in the YAML file located at  `/etc/loki/local-config.yaml` inside the container.
You can update  the environment variable to change the location of the config file or update the config file to change the properties of Loki accordingly.

[console]
----
# Loki configuration
LOKI_CONFIG_FILE=${LOKI_CONFIG_FILE:-/etc/loki/local-config.yaml}
----

== Grafana

Various dashboards to monitor the couchbase cluster are shipped out of the box in Grafana.
You can list all the dashboards using the search dashboard option.

> You may also create additional dashboards that meets your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also create additional dashboards that meet your needs.
```

Post successful completion of the setup steps previously described, you should be able to see a list of attached clusters in the Grafana landing page.

.Couchbase inventory image
image::couchbase-inventory-vm.png[]

You can list all available dashboards by clicking on the search button.

> It will show a list of dashboards similar to the one below. You can navigate to each dashboard by clicking on the name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will show a list of dashboards similar to the one below.
You can navigate to each dashboard by clicking on the name.
```

.Grafana dashboards
image::grafana-dashboards.png[]

== Alert

=== Alerting rules

Using alert rules, you can define alert conditions based on Prometheus language expressions and send notification to an external service when an alert is fired.

> The installation of CMOS comes with default alerting rules present at `/etc/prometheus/alerting/couchbase/` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installation of CMOS comes with default alerting rules located in the `/etc/prometheus/alerting/couchbase/` directory. 
```

            # this expression will be negated and inserted into all rules
            # matching the values in override. 
            expr: '{kubernetes_cluster="kube-dev"}'
            for: 30s
            labels:
                severity: warning
            annotations:
                summary: override kubernetes single alert
                description: "Node {{ $labels.node }} has been unready for a long time\n  VALUE = {{ $value }}\n  LABELS = {{ $labels }}"
----

We support modifying rules via environment variables.
Prometheus automatically replaces template values in rules files with values based on available environment variables.
You can see available environment variables in the https://github.com/couchbaselabs/observability/blob/main/microlith/entrypoints/prometheus.sh[entrypoint of prometheus service^].

.Alert rules image
image::prometheus-alert-rules.png[]

.Alerts image
image::prometheus-alerts.png[]

== Alert manager

By default the CMOS Alertmanager is enabled and Prometheus forwards the alerts to it.
Additional alert managers can be specified by using the same `<file_sd_config>` syntax in  the `/etc/prometheus/alertmanager/custom/` directory.

> Here are environment variables used for Alert manager configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the environment variables used for Alertmanager configuration.
```

image::microlith-runtime.png[]

CMOS is designed as a microlith container with several services included in its stack.
CMOS allows users to control these services in a fine grained manner.
As shown in the above diagram, you can customize the installation by overriding the default service configuration values using environment variables or by providing a native configuration file for each service.

== Disabling a Service

All the services of CMOS stack are enabled by default.
If you choose to disable a service, this is achieved by setting the corresponding environment variables of the docker container. The naming convention to be followed to disable a service is `DISABLE_X`, where `X` is the name of the service (e.g.,`DISABLE_ALERT_MANAGER`, `DISABLE_GRAFANA`, `DISABLE_JAEGER`, `DISABLE_LOKI`, `DISABLE_PROMETHEUS` and `DISABLE_WEBSERVER`).

== Logging

By default, logs can be either provided to standard output `(stdout)` or to service-based log files by setting the `ENABLE_LOG_TO_FILE` configuration value.
If file output is used for the logs, these files will appear in the `/logs/` directory.
Further, if desired, these logs can externally be shared via a volume or bind mount.

> To mount files into a container, use the `docker -v <source>:<destination>` command, ideally as read-only.

Reviewer 2: If the end user wants the container to write the logs to the mounted path, it'll need to be mounted as read-write - so perhaps remove the last part of this sentence to avoid confusion?

For further information, refer to the official documentation:
- https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/
- https://docs.docker.com/storage/bind-mounts/

== Cluster Monitor

> The cluster manager service of the CMOS stack will auto-start and self-configure itself to monitor a Couchbase cluster using the configuration supplied through the following environment variables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cluster monitor service of the CMOS stack will auto-start and self-configure itself to monitor a Couchbase cluster using the configuration supplied through the following environment variables:
```

Cluster Manager is a Couchbase Server component so this could be confusing - in CMOS it's _always_ Cluster Monitor.

- `CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER:-admin}`: The username for the Couchbase cluster to monitor.
- `CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD:-password}`: The password for the Couchbase cluster to monitor.

> - `CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:7196}`: The endpoint of the Couchbase cluster to monitor.

Reviewer 2: These aren't for the Couchbase server, but for the Cluster Monitor itself - the first two are the credentials for its REST API. Couchbase Server is added through the Add Cluster form, not through environment variables.

I think I know where the confusion stems from - were you perhaps looking at https://github.com/couchbaselabs/observability/blob/main/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/deployment-onpremise.adoc? Because there those variables aren't actually passed to Cluster Monitor itself, but used in the `curl` command at the end:

```
CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER=admin
CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD=password
CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:$(docker container port couchbase-grafana 7196)
COUCHBASE_USER=Administrator
COUCHBASE_PWD=password
COUCHBASE_ENDPOINT=http://db2:8091

# This is where the variables are used - not in the CMOS configuration
curl -u "${CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER}:${CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD}" -X POST -d '{ "user": "'"${COUCHBASE_USER}"'", "password": "'"${COUCHBASE_PWD}"'", "host": "'"${COUCHBASE_ENDPOINT}"'" }' "${CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT}/api/v1/clusters"
```

> The cluster manager  exposes a REST API endpoint from the container so that it can be used externally to add/remove Couchbase clusters. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cluster monitor exposes a REST API endpoint from the container so that it can be used externally to add/remove Couchbase clusters. 
```

Two spaces, also `cluster monitor` consistency

> The cluster monitor is also capable of running any scripts found in `/etc/healthcheck/` folder to perform health checks on the Couchbase cluster.

Reviewer 2: This is outdated, this sentence can be removed entirely (I'm not sure when these scripts were removed but it was a long time ago).

# Prometheus url sub path
PROMETHEUS_URL_SUBPATH=${PROMETHEUS_URL_SUBPATH-/prometheus/}

# Prometheus storage path
PROMETHEUS_STORAGE_PATH=${PROMETHEUS_STORAGE_PATH-/prometheus}

# Microlith configuration
PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR=${PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR:-/etc/prometheus/couchbase/monitoring/}
----

=== Endpoints

In CMOS, a https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#file_sd_config[file-based service discovery^] approach is used to support adding/removing endpoints.
These endpoints are used to dynamically scrape metrics.

Based on which services are enabled, the microlith will construct a set of dynamic endpoints.
These endpoints are created for each service by adding a JSON file to the `${PROMETHEUS_DYNAMIC_INTERNAL_DIR:-/etc/prometheus/couchbase/monitoring/}`.

To add Couchbase Server endpoints, create a similar JSON format file like the example in the `/etc/prometheus/couchbase/custom/` directory mounted on the container.
In order to always stay current with the system state, this file is periodically rescanned to add or remove targets.

> While this enables the addition of a new scrape target, it will not automatically add dashboards to Grafana. The dashboards will need to be added manually for the relevant scrape target.

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure what you mean here - the Couchbase Server dashboards will automatically adapt with more clusters added. If you mean dashboards for things other than Couchbase, then this is correct.

Author: yes! you are right, will remove this.

[console]
----
[
    {
      "targets": [
        "exporter:9091"
      ],
      "labels": {
        "job": "db1",
        "container": "exporter"
      }
    }
]
----

You can set the authentication credentials for your Couchbase Server clusters using the `$CB_SERVER_AUTH_USER` and `$CB_SERVER_AUTH_PASSWORD` environment variables.
Note that currently we do not support using different credentials for multiple clusters.

[NOTE]
This is a legacy way of configuring Prometheus targets and we recommend not to use this approach.

> You can use CMOS UI to perform the same using the "Add Cluster" option present on the landing page.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be moved higher? As a user I'd read through all those steps, only to find this note at the end telling me that everything I've just done is legacy.

.Add cluster image
image::add-cluster-vm.png[]

== Loki

> Configuration file for the log aggregation system Loki is present in the YAML file located at  `/etc/loki/local-config.yaml` inside the container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuration file for the log aggregation system Loki is present in the YAML file located at  `/etc/loki/config.yaml` inside the container.
```

Slightly outdated - this is the correct path (the console snippet below is correct).

            # list of rules to be overridden, accepts regexp
            override: ["KubernetesNodeReady"] 
            # if set to false, only base rules are changed and no new rules 
            # are created
            enabled: false
            # this expression will be negated and inserted into all rules
            # matching the values in override. 
            expr: '{kubernetes_cluster="kube-dev"}'
            for: 30s
            labels:
                severity: warning
            annotations:
                summary: override kubernetes single alert
                description: "Node {{ $labels.node }} has been unready for a long time\n  VALUE = {{ $value }}\n  LABELS = {{ $labels }}"
----

We support modifying rules via environment variables.
Prometheus automatically replaces template values in rules files with values based on available environment variables.
You can see available environment variables in the https://github.com/couchbaselabs/observability/blob/main/microlith/entrypoints/prometheus.sh[entrypoint of prometheus service^].

.Alert rules image
image::prometheus-alert-rules.png[]

.Alerts image
image::prometheus-alerts.png[]

> == Alert manager

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Alertmanager
```

Official spelling is one word

If file output is used for the logs, these files will appear in the `/logs/` directory.
Further, if desired, these logs can externally be shared via a volume or bind mount.

To mount files into a container, use the `docker -v <source>:<destination>` command.
For further information, refer to the official documentation:
- https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/
- https://docs.docker.com/storage/bind-mounts/

== Cluster Monitor

The cluster monitor exposes a REST API endpoint from the container so that it can be used externally to add/remove Couchbase clusters.

The cluster monitor can be configured via a bespoke REST API: `curl -u "${CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER}:${CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD}" -X POST -d '{ "user": "'"${COUCHBASE_USER}"'", "password": "'"${COUCHBASE_PWD}"'", "host": "'"${COUCHBASE_ENDPOINT}"'" }' "${CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT}/api/v1/clusters"`

- `CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_USER:-admin}`: The username for the cluster monitor tool.
- `CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_PWD:-password}`: The password for the cluster monitor tool.

> - `CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT=${CLUSTER_MONITOR_ENDPOINT:-http://localhost:7196}`: The endpoint of the cluster monitor tool.

Reviewer 2: `localhost:7196` will only work inside the container - it might be better to use the external path endpoint, `http://localhost:8080/couchbase`

- `COUCHBASE_USER=${COUCHBASE_USER:-Administrator}`: The username for accesing the Couchbase cluster.
- `COUCHBASE_PWD=${COUCHBASE_PWD:-password`: The password for accesing the Couchbase cluster.

> - `COUCHBASE_ENDPOINT=${COUCHBASE_PWD:-http://db2:8091`: This should be set to a node that you want to monitor in a Couchbase cluster.

Reviewer 2: Not sure `COUCHBASE_PWD` should be here - also the syntax on some of these is incorrect (missing right `}`)

=== Endpoints

[NOTE]
This is a legacy way of configuring Prometheus targets and we recommend not to use this approach.

> You can use CMOS UI to perform the same using the "Add Cluster" option present on the landing page.

Reviewer 2: I know you just moved it (sorry!) - would it be best to put it at the top of the _above_ section (i.e. above the manual cluster monitor REST API, as that's what the form does under the hood anyway)?

Author: sure
